# Omeka Classic, Omeka.net, or Omeka S?

Because some organizations and individuals couldn’t or didn’t want to run their own server or buy commercial server space, RRCHNM began developing a hosted version of Omeka that requires much less technical knowledge, infrastructure, and labor. Omeka.net is the hosted version of Omeka. The free, open source, downloadable version of Omeka is available at omeka.org. This version of Omeka is self-hosted software that can be installed on a web hosting server (not on your personal computer, at least not unless you’re willing to install a virtual server on your PC). Librarians or educational technologists at your institution may be happy to install and maintain Omeka for you on an organizational web hosting server; if you’d like to buy commercial web hosting for less than $100 per year and teach yourself to use it, you can check out the [Omeka team’s hosting suggestions](https://omeka.org/classic/docs/GettingStarted/Hosting_Suggestions/). The Digital Fellows are also happy to help you make an informed decision on your web hosting options. 

When considering whether to use the hosted or the self-hosted version of Omeka, you will want to keep in mind the useful lesson from Spiderman: “With great power comes great responsibility.” Concomitantly, of course, “with less responsibility comes less power.” In other words, when you download Omeka from omeka.org, you can customize it as much as you want and install it as many times as you like, but creating and supporting those Omeka sites may take a good bit of knowledge and time. When you use the hosted version of Omeka at omeka.net, it’s much easier, but you will run up against certain limits of space and functionality. You might also think of self-hosting Omeka as like owning a house, whereas using the hosted version of Omeka is like renting an apartment. Moving from one to the other is perfectly feasible, but it’s about the same level of hassle as moving house (it depends on how much stuff you have, for one thing!). Click [here](http://bitly.com/compareomekas) for more on this issue.

Then there’s __Omeka S__, the newest born in the Omeka family. It creates a local network of independently curated websites sharing a collaboratively built pool of items and their metadata. While Omeka Classic is designed for a single site around a general theme, argument, or research question; Omeka S was created for institutions managing a sharable resource pool across multiple sites. In addition, Omeka Classic uses Dublin Core while Omeka S implements multiple vocabularies and facilitates linked open data. If your project would benefit from relational data, then it might make sense to use Omeka S. Omeka Classic is a little easier to get off the ground (it automatically creates a site when you spin up the install) but both are well documented in terms of use. If you want to take a look at the differences yourself, you can experiment in the [Omeka S sandbox](http://omeka.org/s/download/).

Keep in mind that while there is a migration module between Omeka and Omeka S, there is no plugin that allows you to achieve the opposite, at the moment. 

Finally, please note that Omeka is not the only nor always the best solution to create an online archive or a digital exhibit. According to your needs and the nature of your resources, you may want to explore other options, such as Wordpress, Collective Access, and Drupal. 


[<<< Back](digitalexhibitions.md) [Next >>>](next.md)  